Hello, its the 28th edition of the Review Of The Week
And I'm recording it
from Marseille where I am at the moment.
Well.
Then let the intro roll.
I am going to talk about a very important subject
because it will deeply affect the political life in the next months
in the European Union countries
Here is the question.. As you know there are free trade agreements
that have been signed between the European Union and one or another zone in the world.
The legal discussion is whether such an agreement, after being signed by the European Union,
whether this agreement is within the jurisdiction of the sole European Union?
This would mean that the member states would not be involved.
Or does it also depend of the states' jurisdictions?
In this case, the states should also sign one by one a free trade agreement
Do you follow? This is a very important matter because the European Commission
assumed that for a free trade agreement,
since the commerce falls within the European Union jurisprudence,
the individual states are not legally involved
But the Justice Court of the European Union has stated:
and it says: it is true that the commerce falls exclusively  within the Union jurisprudence.
However, when within a free trade agreement there are particular arrangements
like setting up tribunals which judge conflicts between the states and the enterprises, or the enterprises and the states,
these famous tribunals of private arbitration,
then each state must speak up. Do you understand the importance of this matter?
Let me explain this again.
Free trade agreements, from my point of view, are reprehensible,
because it is an illusion to believe that it suffices to move everything around to make the world better
and that this will develop human activity in a reasonable way.
I don't believe that at all!
Let me not go further into that.
What I want to bring to your attention is that these free trade agreements include the creation of these private arbitration tribunals.
You have to understand that!
In the past, when a multinational company had a conflict with another one,
because there was no place to settle their differences because they are multinational
and because they could have conflicts within several countries
they had invented these tribunals of private arbitration.
No problem, that's their business.
That is to say, to sort out their disputes, and possibly their conflicts,
they used to convene a court with a magistrate, lawyers and so on
and the file was discussed. In this way, progressively came to be an international jurisprudence.
And suddenly, the multinational companies, strong with their power, and the transnational companies
have decided to use the same system with the states
If we have a conflict with a state we will take it to an arbitration tribunal
Of course, this is not at all the same problem!
Because what matters for a country is the law, and everyone is subject to the law, including all companies.
If you are in France, you are subject to the French law. But the multinational companies say "no, even in France we will not be subject to French law!"
"Every time we will have a conflict with the French government, we will go to the arbitration tribunal"
As a result there's no longer any need to draft laws, nor even to have a state, since the biggest players in the world's politics, the big companies,
could have their own court to make judgement, and all what you may decide does not count any more
But, wait! This is not just a matter of principle, you understand... Let me give you an example.
If (as it has already happened), a state declares: smoking is very bad for your health, thus I make a law against smoking.
—that's what happened in Australia—
the multinational company said: "you decide whatever you want at home with about cigarettes,
but because we have invested, and we expected to sell as many millions of cigarettes per year,
this being the reason for having made that investment,
this means you are making us lose money, which you now owe us."
They then organize a court case so that the Australian government pays for the cigarettes that the people have not smoked!
Even though the Australian government specifically wanted people not to smoke these cigarettes!
This is just one example.
The same happened in Canada, with a petrol additive.
They realized in Canada that it was clogging the engines and increasing pollution
"Maybe so", said the firm, "but nobody warned us that this product would be banned."
And they took the Canadian government to court, condemning it to pay a fine and to continue authorizing the sale of
this junk that pollutes the air and clogs the engines
Do you understand? This means that the national law no longer matters.
And there is a perverse side to it. For example if you have a progressive government, or a humanist ecological and social government, like mine
Let's say we decide to have 100% organic produce at school cafeterias, and that all other produce are rejected.
Then, you may have whichever company from the food industry saying: "What's this all about then?
We expected to sell – and were previously selling – however many thousands of these produce to local communities for the canteens
we disagree, our investment is in jeopardy. Thus the state owes us some money.
It should compensate us by paying us for what we would have sold."
Then, what happens next? You think: "Dang, if I have to go to court and risk losing the case, I won't make such a decision in the first place."
As we are a big country, we can make the decisions we want.
But imagine a country without sufficient power to contend with big multinational companies.
You need to realize what are these multinational companies.
There are multinational companies that have the same budget as that of several dozens countries!
How do you want those countries to make free decisions?
They can't any longer, they can't.
Take the example of Surinam, in Amazonia.
Imagine they say: we don't want the oil to be extracted here because it will make too much mess
then some experts will say: "But you are bound by previous authorizations, the big oil company that is settled in your country will take you to court."
You understand?
Thus this question of arbitration tribunals is paramount,
because there is no more democracy and the people have no power
if the multinational companies have the right to make their own tribunals to sort out their conflicts with the governments
and the governments cannot enforce the laws they want, that their people want
as long as the multinationals are involved. You see the large question that is raised
Then the European Commission had stated: "This is not your business. We have solved the problem,
and concerning the free trade agreement with Canada, we have resolved the problem.
A new kind of tribunal... private arbitrage... was put in place..."
That's what they say.
Thus, nobody has anything to say. It should be enforced. So you see, this is an important topic.
Since the current government, that of Mr Macron is favorable to the free trade agreement with Canada
since he agrees with another free trade agreement with Asia
thus, for them all was well, they just has to say "It's all decided already, the European Commission said that we don't have any word in the matter."
On the contrary! Now France must have its say,
either by a vote at the Assembly, or by referendum.
And so too for all the other European Union states. Now, firstly this will take time
secondly, as we are dealing with the European Union and that such a decision can only be taken unanimously
everyone in Europe has to agree
It bears without saying that this is going to change the atmosphere.
Thus president Macron will have to present to the vote of the new Assembly
the free trade agreements with Asia and with Canada, and possibly also with the USA.
With this in mind, you need to understand that there will be two types of deputies in the Assembly:
Those who agree to private –
or near-private – arbitration tribunals,
which is to say the whole majority coalition, some socialists (they already said that they agreed)
some members of the Republican party, for them as long as business is concerned they're down
and some centrists
and, on the other side, there will be us, and only us,
because we are the only ones to be against the private arbitration tribunals,
we "La France Insoumise", as well as our various allies in the group that we will form in the National Assembly.
OK? Think about it, people, even if this is complicated and difficult to explain around you
it is of very great importance because at stake is democracy itself.
If, from now on, there is the law for everyone and on the other side another law for multinational companies,
you see that we are no longer living in the same world...
Let me now begin to talk about poverty.
Poverty is starting to take over Europe, increasingly strongly and at all levels.
When I say "at all levels", here is what I mean.
Some people suppose that you become poor by starting with a medium wage, then a low wage, and then, wham, you've become poor.
No no no. Poverty hits at all levels.
This means...
You might be in a certain category, where you have highly skilled job, with a commensurate lifestyle, etc...
Now imagine you get wiped out, you lose your job for some reason or other,
and at that point you suddenly no longer have anything.
Indeed, all of a sudden, you no longer have any income, yet you still have the bills commensurate with your previous income:
maybe a big house, an expensive car, all of that... you have to sell it all, you have to throw it all out the window.
This is just an example, but of course,  you more easily wind up poor starting from the middle class or the working class.
The step between a real wage and poverty is actually surprisingly small.
You know that just about 150€ separates the (official) poverty line from minimum wage.
Few people know this. But it's a tiny step!
Indeed, with only 1000€, in France, we are below the poverty line
– according to international organisations –
but 1000€ is already a lot, for many people, who have tiny tiny retirement pensions.
So that's what brings me to the topic of poverty.
Something quite extraordinary has indeed happened. The IMF –
the International Monetary Fund, a large global institution,
which monitors
(essentially to the benefit of the USA, its main shareholder)
which monitors the state of the world's economies.
The president of this whole thing is Mme Christine Lagarde
This organisation sometimes lends money to various states and then proceeds to dictate policy decisions.
When you fall into the claws of the IMF, usually, it's over, you can close down.
There's no political power left, the IMF makes all the decisions for you.
The FMI said that there is a problem of developing poverty in the richest country of the European Union: Germany.
It's interesting to try to understand this.
Firstly, it tells us what the so-called "German model" is worth,
to all those who played you the violin on this topic,
to such an extent that I wrote a little book on the subject, called "Le Hareng De Bismarck" (Bismarck's Herring).
(NB: 'Herring' refers to a French expression according to which the truth always eventually surfaces.)
In this book, I took apart line by line all the "great examples" of German success,
and I showed that it was all completely phoney.
Indeed, I showed that Germany's economy was fragile,
very concentrated in certain domains of activity,
and that it creates an incredible number of poor and underpaid people,
to an absolutely unique extent in Europe.
So now, the IMF itself is saying that it can't go on any longer,
because the risk of increased poverty, of extreme poverty, in Germany, is too considerable.
So you must then understand that this is all linked to economic policy.
Meanwhile, Germany keeps exporting its own political model.
You know,
it is the Germans who were the harshest to the Greeks.
So Hollande at the time was the "good cop",
so that while Dr Schäuble and Mme Merkel were belting Mr Tsipras,
Hollande was saying "let me help me help you", and other phrases of the sort,
to make him swallow the bill to sign.
So then Tsipras indeed signed, the height of stupidity.
He said "Well I'm going to...", you know, the usual spiel.
"I'm going to change things from the inside."
So of course all the journalists came onto me, telling me:
"Your friend Tsipras has a more reasonable attitude than you do."
"Look, he's going to make the necessary efforts."
"He's going to change it from within." etc
Outcome? We're even worse off than when we started.
That is to stay, it changed absolutely nothing to the situation in Greece,
and they already had to swallow two additional plans.
We no longer dare to say that these were "de rigueur" (necessary), as this time they're down to scraping the bone.
And now, yet another plan is about to be applied.
Pay close attention to how it goes down.
It's interesting to see how these people operate,
because they then proceed to apply the same method in all the other countries.
You just say "Well it's just austerity."
No, it's more cunning than that!
They unravel the sweater from the loose thread hanging out,
parts of the population which they see as defenseless.
Of course, top of their list of targets are the retired people.
This is because, at the outset, retired people have less charges than others.
They might own their apartment, or might have resided in the same place for long enough,
so that their rent remained level,
and hasn't increased as violently as if the lease had been renewed,
or whatever else have you. Anyway.
Retired people tend also to already be equipped,
so they have less of a need to invest into every day life than a young couple might.
So, when retired people withstand the first blows,
well, of course, they are unhappy about it.
But they rationalise it.
They tell themselves "Well, we've known worse. We've been more miserable than this."
"If it's to the benefit of the young people, it's not so bad..."
"We're willing to make sacrifices..."
After that, from sacrifice to sacrifice, we pare off everything they have.
This is exactly what happened in Greece.
Now they hit, they hit, they hit, and they keep hitting the retired people.
So the retirees suffer.
They commit suicide.
They live an awful life.
So then, well, they rebel.
But then, look in France. Where does Macron's government start? With the retirees.
He says that the taxpayer will no longer contribute to unemployment benefits through payroll taxes.
But then, who pays?
With or without these payroll contributions, the unemployment benefits still remain, as one should well hope,
even though they intend to monitor more closely the unemployed, as to them they're but a bunch of dodgers.
Nevertheless, we still have to pay for these benefits.
OK, maybe only half of the unemployed receive benefits, but it's still there.
So we still have to pay this.
By law, every euro of social contributions (payroll tax) exonerated has to then be found in the state's budget.
Where then does Mr Macron hope to find the money to compensate these social contributions towards unemployment, which will no longer be paid through the companies?
The CSG ("Contribution Sociale Généralisée", Generalized Social Contribution)
But then, who pays the CSG?
In part, the retirees.
So you see the absurdity of the situation.
Retirees will end up contributing to the CSG, to compensate the payroll tax cuts, towards unemployment benefits.
But according to the system of social insurance, we give according to our ability, and receive according to our needs.
In the face of a risk!
A risk which we protect ourselves from through this insurance.
You follow?
It's social insurance.
But tell me now: retirees aren't at risk from unemployment; they are retired.
So we're making them contribute, in an indirect manner, for something they aren't at risk of.
It's thus indeed a tax.
And it's indeed a tax which will take from the less privileged.
You see, the policies are consistent.
Poverty is the evil that is taking over society,
and is the sign of society's total failure
"The great and beautiful liberal model"
blahblahblah
"it all works"
"Everyone's happy"
"We buy a new smartphone every six months"
etc etc
A total invention.
In their daily life, a greater and greater amount of people are suffering.
And it's the weakest that the system attacks.
Nibble, nibble, nibble, nibble.
All that for what, I wonder?
At the end, we all live in the same society.
Do the rich figure they can close themselves off, barricade themselves off – they try, eh? –
and keep ignoring what happens in the rest of society.
They will unleash a terrible violence within it.
All of this will come to be settled in the upcoming legislative elections.
But above all, I want everyone to understand
Is that our opponent
financial capitalism
has a clear strategy. It has its politicians, and its media puppets,
but it does have a strategy. It doesn't shoot blindly.
It finds an end and takes it from there.
It always starts from the same side: devastating social protection systems,
where we mutually protect each other,
to force everyone into a battle of each against all.
Now I'm going to tell you about something that might seem off-the-wall,
but yet, I find it so meaningful.
Here's the deal.
... the tomato.
Everyone eats tomatoes. You didn't realise? Yes indeed.
We eat, on average, 5.5kg of tomatoes every year.
Individually.
So you see.
We consume a lot.
So we have to produce them, and we have to sell them.
So of course...
how do we produce, how do we sell, under liberal logic?
The place where we can pay people the least to pick the tomatoes, that's where we put the tomatoes.
And we use a particular strain of tomatoes, those suitable to be turned into concentrates.
You know, when you prepare pasta, or whatever else which needs tomato sauce,
pay attention to where the sauce comes from, as written on the packaging.
You'll see that they often come from very, very far.
What will probably surprise you is that these tomatoes aren't like the usual tomatoes you know.
They grow underground.
And they have a thicker skin.
It's with these tomatoes that we produce tomato juice in industrial quantities.
And whereabouts might these be produced? In China, of course!
Because over there, we can find people who will pick these tomatoes for peanuts.
So you have a stream of tomatoes, made into a sauce, incoming from China.
So this stream arrives, well, it arrives in Europe.
It arrives in Italy. Well guess who takes charge?
The mafia.
Of course.
The mafia then recirculates this sauce, making an extraordinary profit off the back of these large quantities of tomatoes from China.
A book was written on this matter.
It describes the involvement of the mafia in the world's consumption of tomatoes.
It's called "L'Empire De L'Or Rouge" (The Empire of Red Gold)
Global study of today's tomato.
But.
This too encourages reflection.
How can we have a tomato mafia?
Tomatoes, after all...
Never would you have thought that there would be such political stakes,
such economic stakes, with these poor tomatoes.
This is because we started off with the idea
that relocating the whole world was the ordinary approach.
If we started from the idea that, as France can produce tomatoes, it can produce tomatoes for itself.
Period.
And the Spanish produce tomatoes for themselves, and the Portuguese produce tomatoes for themselves.
So you say: "But what of the countries where tomatoes can't grow?"
Sweden, Norway...
To be seen. Nevertheless...
we'll ask what quantities are needed.
That's called solidary protectionism.
We make our own tomatoes, and we make enough for the needs of others who can't produce their own.
But not
when any one has the opportunity to produce industrial quantities of tomatoes
... and produce in the greatest quantities possible at the lowest possible price to squash all producers of tomatoes elsewhere.
Well that, that is the liberal logic.
So you see, when you think about tomato juice, or of the tomato concentrate that you put in your pasta
you find political stakes.
So you'll view your pasta differently next time, no? So.
I hope you enjoyed.
You see, I didn't talk about political news.
I've got other places to do that.
Sometimes I make little movies, little videos
Or I talk about it here or there, and we put that up for you to watch.
So I wanted to... as you say, "sanctuarise" the weekly review,
so that we could talk about thought-provoking subjects, rooted in every day life.
Topics where we can see the link between our thoughts about the world, economy, and politics.
Rather than things that are strictly to do with electoral campaigns, in which I of course participate.
There you have it.
If you liked this review, please give it a little blue thumb.
It helps us rise up in the rankings, and it assists in the diffusion of this YouTube channel,
which is already a very impressive thing, as we draw near to 400k subscribers.
If you want us to reach that milestone, you just need to subscribe.
There it is. Thank you for the attention you have given this little video.